1892 in sports describes the year's events in world sport.


== American football ==
College championship
College football national championship – Yale Bulldogs
Non-college amateur championships
Western Pennsylvania champions – Allegheny Athletic Association
Events
September 28 – The first night football game is attempted between Wyoming Seminary and Mansfield State.
12 November – William "Pudge" Heffelfinger is paid $500 by the Allegheny Athletic Association to play in a game against the Pittsburgh Athletic Club. He is considered the first professional football player of all time.


== Association football ==
England
The Football League – Sunderland 42 points, Preston North End 37, Bolton Wanderers 36, Aston Villa 30, Everton 28, Wolves 26
FA Cup final – West Bromwich Albion 3–0 Aston Villa in the last final to be played at The Oval.
13 March — Liverpool Football Club is founded after Everton is split by a faction fight at board level over the proposed purchase of the freehold at Anfield. One faction, retaining the club's name and players, quits Anfield and moves across Stanley Park to establish a new home at Goodison Park. The other faction, which owns Anfield, decides to establish a new club there and this is called Liverpool F.C.. The new club joins the Lancashire League prior to the 1892–1893 season.
With the demise of the rival Football Alliance, the Football League is able to expand by inviting former Alliance members to join it. Membership doubles from 14 to 28 clubs with divisions introduced for the first time in the 1892–93 season. The original Football League becomes the new First Division, expanded to 16 teams; and the new Second Division is formed with 12 teams, many of them former members of the Alliance.
Darwen is relegated from the First Division; Newton Heath (Manchester United), Nottingham Forest and Sheffield Wednesday are elected to the First Division for 1892–93. Members of the new Second Division are Ardwick (Manchester City), Bootle (league members 1892–93), Burton United (1892–1907), Crewe Alexandra, Darwen, Grimsby Town, Lincoln City, Northwich Victoria (1892–94), Burslem Port Vale (1892–1907), Sheffield United, Small Heath (Birmingham City) and Walsall.
Germany
25 July — Hertha Berlin founded as one of the oldest clubs in Germany
Scotland
Scottish Football League – Dumbarton
Scottish Cup final – Celtic 5–1 Queen's Park at Ibrox Park
The SFL is reduced to 10 teams for 1892–93 after Cambuslang and Vale of Leven are expelled.


== Athletics (track and field) ==
Events
C. B. Fry equals the world record for the long jump of 23 ft. 5in – the record stands for 18 months.


== Baseball ==
National championship
The "National League and American Association" is the sole major league in baseball after incorporating four clubs from the former American Association into the expanded and restructured National League and buying out the four others.
The National League plays a split season, Boston Beaneaters winning the first half, Cleveland Spiders winning the second. At the end of the season, Boston defeats Cleveland 5–0 in a championship series. The experiment will not be repeated but it will be adapted after two-month interruption of the 1981 season.


== Basketball ==
Events
January 15 – James Naismith's rules for basketball are published for the first time in the Springfield YMCA International Training School's newspaper, in an article titled "A New Game." They said it was called "Basketball."
March 11 – First basketball game played in public, between students and faculty at the Springfield YMCA. The final score was 5–1 in favor of the students, with the only goal for the faculty being scored by Amos Alonzo Stagg. A crowd of 200 spectators watched the game.


== Boxing ==
Events
7 September — James J. Corbett wins the World Heavyweight Championship with a 21st round knockout of John L. Sullivan at the Olympic Club in New Orleans. Sullivan is gradually worn down by Corbett's combination of elusive footwork and fast jabs. Corbett holds the title until 1897.
Lineal world champions
World Heavyweight Championship – John L. Sullivan → James J. Corbett
World Middleweight Championship – Bob Fitzsimmons
World Welterweight Championship – vacant → "Mysterious" Billy Smith
World Lightweight Championship – Jack McAuliffe
World Featherweight Championship – George Dixon


== Cricket ==
Events
The English cricket team in Australia in 1891–92 tours Australia and Ceylon. The team, captained by W G Grace, is organised by Lord Sheffield who later subscribes his Sheffield Shield to Australian domestic first-class cricket. 29 matches are played in total, of which 12 are won, two lost and 15 drawn. Eight of the games are first–class including three Tests versus Australia. Australia win the Test series 2–1 to claim The Ashes.
Beginning of first-class cricket in India as the annual Bombay Presidency Matches between the Europeans and the Parsees are recognised as the inaugural first-class fixtures. Soon afterwards, the inaugural first-class tour of India by an overseas team takes place when Lord Hawke organises his 1892–93 English touring team.
England
County Championship – Surrey
Most runs – Herbie Hewett 1407 @ 35.17 (HS 201)
Most wickets – J T Hearne 163 @ 15.39 (BB 9–41)
Wisden Five Batsmen of the Year – Herbie Hewett, Lionel Palairet, Walter Read, Stanley Scott, Andrew Stoddart
Australia
Most runs – Jack Lyons 557 @ 55.70 (HS 145)
Most wickets – George Giffen 50 @ 17.30 (BB 9–96)
South Africa
Currie Cup – not contested
West Indies
Inter-Colonial Tournament – not contested


== Golf ==
Major tournaments
British Open – Harold Hilton
Other tournaments
British Amateur – John Ball


== Horse racing ==
Events
11 May — African-American jockey Alonzo "Lonnie" Clayton, aged 15, becomes the youngest rider ever to win the Kentucky Derby
England
Grand National – Father O'Flynn
1,000 Guineas Stakes – La Fleche
2,000 Guineas Stakes – Bona Vista
Epsom Derby – Sir Hugo
Epsom Oaks – La Fleche
St. Leger Stakes – La Fleche
Australia
Melbourne Cup – Glenloth
Canada
Queen's Plate – O'Donohue
Ireland
Irish Grand National – Springfield Maid
Irish Derby Stakes – Roy Neil
USA
Kentucky Derby – Azra
Preakness Stakes – not run
Belmont Stakes – Patron


== Ice hockey ==
10 January — Ottawa Hockey Club defeats the Montreal Hockey Club 4–3 to become Amateur Hockey Association of Canada (AHAC) champions
2 March — Ottawa Hockey Club wins its second consecutive Ontario Hockey Association (OHA) title, defeating Toronto Osgoode Hall 10–4.
7 March — Montreal Hockey Club defeats Ottawa 1–0 to regain the AHAC title for the fifth consecutive year.
18 March — At a celebration dinner to honour the Ottawa Hockey Club, Canadian Governor-General Lord Stanley announces his new trophy to be awarded to the ice hockey champions of Canada. Originally known as the "Dominion Hockey Challenge Cup", it becomes known as the Stanley Cup, the championship trophy of the National Hockey League (NHL).
11 November — The Manitoba Hockey Association is founded to organize ice hockey play in Manitoba.


== Ice skating ==
Events
The International Skating Union, the world governing body for ice skating, is founded in the Netherlands.


== Rowing ==
The Boat Race
9 April — Oxford wins the 49th Oxford and Cambridge Boat Race


== Rugby football ==
Home Nations Championship
The 10th series is contested by England, Ireland, Scotland and Wales. England wins all its three games to take the title.


== Tennis ==
England
Wimbledon Men's Singles Championship – Wilfred Baddeley (GB) defeats Joshua Pim (Ireland) 4–6 6–3 6–3 6–2
Wimbledon Women's Singles Championship – Lottie Dod (GB) defeats Blanche Bingley Hillyard (GB) 6–1 6–1
France
French Men's Singles Championship – Jean Schopfer defeats Fassitt (GB) 6–2 1–6 6–2
USA
American Men's Singles Championship – Oliver Campbell defeats Fred Hovey 7–5 3–6 6–3 7–5
American Women's Singles Championship – Mabel Cahill (GB) defeats Elisabeth Moore 5–7 6–3 6–4 4–6 6–2


== References ==