1893 in sports describes the year's events in world sport.


== American football ==
College championship
College football national championship – Princeton Tigers
Events
22 February — Alabama Crimson Tide and Auburn Tigers meet at Lakeview Baseball Park in Birmingham, Alabama for the first Iron Bowl.
2 December – Midshipman Joseph M. Reeves becomes the first documented player to wear a football helmet during the Army–Navy Game.


== Association football ==
Argentina
21 February — formation of the Argentine Football Association (Asociación del Fútbol Argentino or AFA)
Bohemia
AC Sparta Prague, officially founded on November 16.(later Czechoslovakia, present day Czech Republic)
England
The Football League – Sunderland 48 points, Preston North End 37, Everton 36, Aston Villa 35, Bolton Wanderers 32, Burnley 30
FA Cup final – Wolverhampton Wanderers 1–0 Everton at Fallowfield Stadium in Manchester
Ahead of the 1893–94 season, the Football League decides to expand the Second Division from 12 to 16 clubs but, with the unexpected demise of Accrington, they are left with 15.
Notts County and Accrington have been relegated from the First Division and replaced by Darwen and Sheffield United, both promoted from the Second Division. Bootle is expelled from the league and, to make the Second Division up to 16 clubs, the league elects Liverpool, Middlesbrough Ironopolis (league membership 1893–94), Newcastle United, Rotherham Town (1893–96) and Woolwich Arsenal, the latter being the first club from the south of England to join the Football League. Unexpectedly, Accrington then withdraws from the Football League and the 1893–94 Second Division has to proceed with an uneven 15 clubs.
Although the Football League is experiencing membership difficulties at this time, it has nevertheless succeeded in electing three of its most illustrious members: Liverpool, Newcastle United and Arsenal.
Portugal
28 September — foundation of F.C. Porto as Football Club do Porto
Scotland
Scottish Football League – Celtic
Scottish Cup final – Queen's Park 2–1 Celtic at Ibrox Park (replay after first match abandoned)
Formation of the SFL Second Division ahead of the 1893–94 season. Abercorn and Clyde are relegated to the Second Division and replaced in the First Division by Dundee and St. Bernard's. The new members of the Second Division are Cowlairs (re–elected to the SFL), Hibernian, Greenock Morton, Motherwell, Northern FC, Partick Thistle, Port Glasgow Athletic and Thistle FC.


== Baseball ==
National championship
Beginning in 1893, the National League's championship pennant is awarded to the first–place club in the standings at the end of the season. Boston Beaneaters takes the 1893 title and there is no post–season play–off series.
Events
The pitcher's rubber replaces the box and the effective distance from home plate increases from 55 feet to 60 feet, 6 inches.


== Basketball ==
Events
8 April — first college basketball game takes place in Beaver Falls, Pennsylvania where Geneva College defeats New Brighton YMCA


== Boxing ==
Events
World Lightweight Champion Jack McAuliffe retires undefeated and is one of the few boxers to be unbeaten in an entire career. The title becomes vacant.
Lineal world champions
World Heavyweight Championship – James J. Corbett
World Middleweight Championship – Bob Fitzsimmons
World Welterweight Championship – "Mysterious" Billy Smith
World Lightweight Championship – Jack McAuliffe → title vacant after McAuliffe retires undefeated
World Featherweight Championship – George Dixon


== Cricket ==
Events
The inaugural Sheffield Shield competition in Australia is won by Victoria.
The 1892–93 season in India marks the beginning of recognised first-class cricket there.
An Australian team tours England and plays a Test series of three matches. Two are drawn and England win the other to reclaim The Ashes.
England
County Championship – Yorkshire
Most runs – Andrew Stoddart 2072 @ 42.28 (HS 195*)
Most wickets – J T Hearne 212 @ 16.47 (BB 8–55)
Wisden Five All–Round Cricketers – George Giffen, Alec Hearne, Stanley Jackson, Harry Trott, Ted Wainwright
Australia
Sheffield Shield – Victoria
Most runs – George Giffen 468 @ 58.50 (HS 181)
Most wickets – George Giffen 33 @ 23.00 (BB 9–147)
India
Bombay Presidency – Parsees
South Africa
Currie Cup – Western Province
West Indies
Inter-Colonial Tournament – Barbados


== Golf ==
Major tournaments
British Open – William Auchterlonie
Other tournaments
British Amateur – P.C. Anderson


== Horse racing ==
England
Grand National – Cloister
1,000 Guineas Stakes – Siffleuse
2,000 Guineas Stakes – Isinglass
Epsom Derby – Isinglass
Epsom Oaks – Mrs Butterwick
St. Leger Stakes – Isinglass
Australia
Melbourne Cup – Tarcoola
Canada
Queen's Plate – Martello
Ireland
Irish Grand National – Thurles
Irish Derby Stakes – Bowline
USA
Kentucky Derby – Lookout
Preakness Stakes – not run
Belmont Stakes – Commanche


== Ice hockey ==
Events
March — the Ottawa Hockey Club defeats the Toronto Granites by default to win the Ontario Hockey Association title.
17 March — At the conclusion of the 1893 AHAC season, Montreal Hockey Club wins the championship with a record of finishes in first place and is awarded the inaugural Stanley Cup. The club, which is in dispute with the Montreal AAA, refuses to accept it.


== Rowing ==
The Boat Race
22 March — Oxford wins the 50th Oxford and Cambridge Boat Race


== Rugby football ==
Home Nations Championship
In the 11th series, six matches are played between England, Ireland, Scotland and Wales. Wales wins all three of its matches to take the Championship for the first time.


== Speed skating ==
Events
First World Championships in speed skating (open to men only) directly under the auspices of the ISU held in Amsterdam
Speed Skating World Championships
Men's All-round Champion – Jaap Eden (Netherlands)


== Tennis ==
England
Wimbledon Men's Singles Championship – Joshua Pim (Ireland) defeats Wilfred Baddeley (GB) 3–6 6–1 6–3 6–2
Wimbledon Women's Singles Championship – Lottie Dod (GB) defeats Blanche Bingley Hillyard (GB) 6–8 6–1 6–4
France
French Men's Singles Championship – Laurent Riboulet defeats Jean Schopfer 6–3 6–3
USA
American Men's Singles Championship – Robert Wrenn defeats Fred Hovey 6–4 3–6 6–4 6–4
American Women's Singles Championship – Aline Terry defeats Augusta Schultz 6–1 6–3


== Yacht racing ==
America's Cup
The New York Yacht Club retains the America's Cup as Vigilant defeats British challenger Valkyrie II, of the Royal Yacht Squadron, 3 races to 0


== References ==