The World Festival of Youth and Students is an international event, organized by the World Federation of Democratic Youth (WFDY), a United Nations-recognized international youth non-governmental organization, jointly with the International Union of Students since 1947.
The festival has been held regularly since 1947 as an event of global youth solidarity for democracy and against war and imperialism. The largest festival was the 6th, held in 1957 in Moscow, when 34,000 young people from 131 countries attended the event. This festival also marked the international debut of the song "Moscow Nights", which subsequently went on to become perhaps the most widely recognized Russian song in the world. In terms of the number of the attending countries, the largest festival was the 13th, held in 1989 in Pyongyang when 177 countries attended the event.
The World Federation of Democratic Youth was founded to bring together young people of both the socialist and capitalist countries to promote peaceful cooperation and mutual rejection of war. However, with the onset of the Cold War soon after, the organization and the festivals became a matter of contention within the rivalry. Because of the enormous expenditure and coordination required to support a youth festival, most of the early festivals were held in cities in the socialist countries of Europe. However, many festivals, both then and more so since, have been held in non-socialist countries, affirming the commitment to peaceful coexistence between the peoples living under the different systems.
The most recent festival was held in Quito, Ecuador, on 7-13 December 2013, and the next festival will take place in Sochi, Russia on 13-22 October 2017.


== Chronology ==


== References ==


== External links ==
Official Website of the 17th World Festival of Youth and Students
Official Website of the 19th World Festival of Youth and Students
Official Website of the World Federation of Democratic Youth
Chronology of World Festivals of Youth and Students
16th World Festival of Youth and Students, Official Website
Video of the 16th World Festival of Youth and Students in Caracas
North Korea Youth Festival 1989