The Commonwealth Games Federation (CGF) is the international organisation responsible for the direction and control of the Commonwealth Games and Commonwealth Youth Games, and is the foremost authority in matters relating to the games. The headquarters of CGF are located in London, England, United Kingdom. 


== History ==
Due to the success of the first 1930 British Empire Games in Hamilton, Canada, a meeting of representatives from Great Britain, its colonies and territories decided that the games, similar to the Olympic Games should be held every four years, and that an authoritative organisation should be formed. Following the 1932 Summer Olympics, it was decided to form the "British Empire Games Federation" who would be responsible for the organising of the games. The name of the federation was changed in 1952 to the "British Empire and Commonwealth Games Federation", and again in Jamaica in 1966 to the "British Commonwealth Games Federation", until eventually being changed again in Christchurch, New Zealand in 1974 to the "Commonwealth Games Federation".


== Organisation ==
The federation is governed by the General Assembly and Executive Board:


=== General Assembly ===
The General Assembly is the ultimate governance and authority in the CGF with powers to vote on decisions, including on which cities and Commonwealth Games Association's will host the Commonwealth Games. It consists of 3 or more representatives of a 'Commonwealth Games Association' (CGA) of each member countries and territories, the Vice-Patron, Life Vice-Presidents and the members of the Executive Board.
Sessions of the General Assembly are chaired by the CGF President, with each CGA and the President having one vote. However the Vice-Patron, Life Vice-Presidents, the Executive Board, representatives of an Organising Committee (OC) of a Commonwealth Games and obersvers invited by the President may deliberate but do not have voting powers at the General Assembly.


=== Executive Board ===
The Executive Board are representative of the Commonwealth Games Associations (CGA) which form the General Assembly, and have authority to act on behalf of the federation concerning the games. The board consists of the ex officio Vice-Patron (currently, HRH The Earl of Wessex), the President, six officers of CGF and six Vice-Presidents representing, and being responsible for the CGA's in the 6 regions of the CGF (Africa, Americas, Asia, Caribbean, Europe and Oceania).
Members of the Executive Board are either elected or appointed, generally holding office from their date of appointment to the conclusion of the General Assembly held in the year following the next Commonwealth Games, some being re-elected or re-appointed. The Vice-Patron is elected at the General Assembly and usually remains in office for life.


== Honours ==

As well as awarding medals to athletes, the federation may award membership of the Order of Merit for distinguished services rendered to the Commonwealth Games movement, including the games themselves, to the federation and to a Commonwealth Games Association. The honour is awarded on the recommendation of the Executive Board at the General Assembly.
On recommendation of the Executive Board, at General Assembly the federation may also elect Life Vice-Presidents, providing there are no more than six Life Vice-Presidents at a time as an award for services to the CGF. Former Chairmen and Presidents automatically become a Life Vice-President.


== Bidding Procedures and Hosting ==
see: Bids for the 2014 Commonwealth Games, Bids for the 2018 Commonwealth Games
The General Assembly of the CGF are responsible for deciding who will host the Commonwealth Games, 8 years prior to the games in question once all bids have been submitted. The selection process is made in accordance with the Candidate City Manual, as drafted by the Executive Board and made available to candidates 18 months before a decision is made. The federation then entrusts the organisation of the games to the organising committee, CGA, and government of the winning host nation or territory, including the security and finance, but is still monitored by the federation.


== Leadership ==
The President of the Commonwealth Games Federation is responsible for chairing the Executive Board and the General Assembly. A candidate is elected to the position by the General Assembly the year following the Commonwealth Games. Other duties include inviting the Head of the Commonwealth for the opening and closing declaration of the games and overseeing the preparations for upcoming events.
Previously before the XVI Commonwealth Games in 1998, the President was a ceremonial role, taking on the duties of the now Vice-Patron. The Chairman was elected by the General Assembly as head of the Commonwealth Games Federation.


== See also ==
International Olympic Committee
Olympic Council of Asia


== External links ==
Commonwealth Games Federation Official Website
Glasgow 2014 Commonwealth Games Official Website


== References ==