Circuit training is a form of body conditioning or Endurance training/resistance training using high-intensity aerobics. It targets strength building or muscular endurance. An exercise "circuit" is one completion of all prescribed exercises in the program. When one circuit is complete, one begins the first exercise again for the next circuit. Traditionally, the time between exercises in circuit training is short, often with rapid movement to the next exercise.
The program was developed by R.E. Morgan and G.T. Adamson in 1957 at the University of Leeds in England.


== Typical activities in a circuit training ==
A circuit should work each section of the body individually. Typical activities include:
Upper-body
Squat ups
Bench dips
Back extensions
Medicine ball chest pass
Bench lift
Inclined press up
Core & trunk
Sit ups (lower abdominal)
Stomach crunch (upper abdominal)
Back extension chest raise
Lower-body
Squat jumps
Compass jumps
Astride jumps
Step ups
Shuttle runs
Hopping shuttles
Bench squat
Total-body
Burpees
Treadmills
Squat thrusts
Skipping
Jogging


== Effects of circuit training ==
Studies at Baylor University and The Cooper Institute show that circuit training is the most time efficient way to enhance cardiovascular fitness and muscle endurance. Studies show that circuit training helps women to achieve their goals and maintain them longer than other forms of exercise or diet.
Morgan and Anderson claim:

Perhaps a most profound finding of this study, from a health perspective, is that this investigation clearly shows that performance of this circuit of exercises,this level of intensity elicited oxygen consumption values (39% to 51.5% of VO2max) that meet established guidelines of the American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM) for the recommended intensity (40% to 85% of VO2maxR) of exercise for developing and maintaining cardio-respiratory fitness. Thus, this circuit not only provides a suitable muscular fitness stimulus but also helps to meet ACSM cardiovascular guidelines and the newly published Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2005 for physical activity.

One advantage is that reduced station times will encourage the participants to lift heavier weights, which means they can achieve overload with smaller number of repetitions: typically in the range of 25 to 50 depending on their training goals.


== See also ==
Bodyweight exercise
Threshold training
Calisthenics
General fitness training
High-intensity interval training
Interval training
Isometric exercise
Long slow distance
Plyometric
Resistance training
Stretching
Supercompensation
Weight training
vVO2max


== References ==