Some team sports put players on different official lists according to circumstances for that player, for example if they are injured. There can be different rules for players on different lists, and the details vary between sports.


== NFL ==
Active list
Inactive list
Injured reserve list
Reserve-military list
Physically Unable to Perform list
Reserve-retired
Reserve/Suspended


== MLB ==
Active list - Also called the active roster, the 25-man is composed of 25 players who are playing for their Major League team. They are the starting eight position players, pitchers, and reserve players on the team. Players on the active roster are also on the 40-man roster. These players are generally the only ones who dress in uniform and are the only ones who may take the field in a game at any time. Typically, only players on the 25-man roster, and players who are on the disabled list but were on the 25-man roster, travel on road trips with the Major League team.
Reserved list - Defined in Major League Rule 2, the 40-man roster is also known as the Major League Reserve List. This name hearkens back to baseball's past when teams reserved the rights to a number of their players, making it impossible for any other team to sign those individuals. In time, a team's reserve list was expanded to all players under contract to that team until the player was released (potentially never). In the 1970s, free agency allowed players achieving certain conditions the opportunity to leave their original team. The system has undergone further changes since then, but there are still players under reserve from year to year on each team. Those players include most minor leaguers and players on the Major League Reserve List.
Bereavement list - Major League players may be placed on the bereavement list due to severe illness or death of that player’s or his spouse’s immediate family. Minimum period is 3 days, maximum 7 days. Players on this list are counted towards the Reserve List Limit but not the Active List Limit.
Designated List - When the Active or Reserve List Limit has been reached for a particular club, and the club desires to add an additional player, one player from that club must be designated, meaning giving notice to the Commissioner to release or assign that player within 10 days. Such players do not count towards the player limits, but cannot participate until release or assigned.
Disabled list - 10-Day: The player must remain off the active roster for a minimum of 10 calendar days, starting on the day following the player’s last game. 60-Day: Same rules apply, however, this may only be used when the team’s 40-man roster is full. Any player placed on the 60-day disabled list after August 1 may not play for the remainder of the season, including any post-season game.
Emergency Disabled list - Maximum number of players on list at one time-no limit. Minimum period of inactivity-sixty (60) calendar days. Players placed on this list after August 1 shall remain there for the balance of the season. This list may only be used when a club is at the maximum limit of 40 players.
Disqualified list - Players who violate their player contract. Players on this list do not count towards the Reserved List or Active List limits. A player may remain on this list for two consecutive years before he is removed. A player who is "Disqualified" is deemed "suspended" on the official MLB transaction report.
Ineligible list - Players found guilty of serious misconduct (gambling, tanking, bribery, violence to umpires). Players on this list do not count towards the Reserved List or Active List limits. A player may remain on this list for two consecutive years before he is removed.
Military list - Players with definite orders to report for military service. Players on this list do not count towards the Reserved List or Active List limits. Upon learning that a player has separated from military service, a team must immediately notify the Commissioner.
Restricted list - Players who fail to report within 10 days of the season, or who fail to come to a contract with the team prior to that time. Players on this list do not count towards the Reserved List or Active List limits. A player may remain on this list for two consecutive years before he is removed. Often, placing a player on the Restricted List is akin to releasing him without fully relinquishing his rights.
Suspended list - Player may be suspended by his club or the league for insubordination, misconduct, or failure to report in playing condition. A player on this lists counts both towards the Reserve List and the Active List limits.
Temporarily inactive list - Players not able to render active service due to: (1) necessary temporary absence due to family member’s illness; (2) absence excused for personal obligations; or (3) awaiting release for the purpose of allowing the player to sign with a foreign league. Minimum placement is 3 days. Players on the TIA count towards the Reserve List limit but not the Active List limit.
Voluntarily retired list - Player under contract who retires is placed on the Voluntarily Retired List. If a player desires to return, he may not be reinstated until 60 days after the season in which he retired. He may also not play baseball elsewhere without obtaining consent from the club owning his rights. Players on this list do not count towards the Reserved List or Active List limits. A player may remain on this list for two consecutive years before he is removed.


== NBA ==
Active List
Suspended list


== NHL ==
Injured reserve list


== References ==


== External links ==
http://www.nba.com/analysis/00421026.html
http://www.brewcrewball.com/2009/1/4/703125/the-40-man-roster-how-does