A hybrid sport is one which combines two or more (often similar) sports in order to create a new sport, or to allow meaningful competition between players of those sports.
The most popular hybrid sport in terms of attendance and television viewers is international rules football.


== Active sports ==
B
BASEketball - a hybrid sport which combines the game of basketball with baseball rules.
Bossaball - a hybrid sport combining elements of volleyball, association football, gymnastics, and Capoeira, played on the inflatable field with 2 trampolines at each side of the net. Allowing players per side to bounce high to spike or touch the ball and touch it with any part of the body, especially arms and hands
C
Chess boxing – a hybrid sport which combines the sport of boxing with games of chess in alternating rounds. Chess boxing fights have been organized since early 2003. The sport was started when Dutch artist Iepe Rubingh, inspired by fictional descriptions of the sport in the writing of Enki Bilal, organized actual matches. The sport has become increasingly popular since then. To succeed players must be both skilled chess players and skilled boxers.
Composite rules shinty-hurling – The Irish sports of hurling or camogie combined with the Scottish sport of shinty.
Composite rules Softball-Baseball - a hybrid bat-and-ball sports which combines the elements of Baseball and Softball, played on the large identical baseball diamond with the larger ball, ten rather than nine innings, and both underarm and overarm pitchings.
D
Darchery - the hybrid sports combining both Darts and Archery, using bows and arrows typically used for archery but the target is the dart board.
Disc Golf - a hybrid flying disc sport with elements of golf
F
Football tennis – a hybrid of association football and tennis
Footgolf - a hybrid of association football and golf
Footvolley – a hybrid of association football and Volleyball
I
International rules football – a combination of Gaelic football and Australian rules football. The International Rules Series, an annual series of two games between representative teams from Ireland and Australia, attracted sell-out crowds during its 2006 edition.
K
Korfball – several claims that it was developed as a hybrid of netball and basketball to enable play between teams of mixed gender. Despite the origins of korfball, today it does facilitate exactly that purpose.
Kronum – A hybrid of handball, soccer, basketball and rugby played on a circular field with four goals at each end.
M
Mixed Martial Arts - a full contact individual combat sports which allowed to use the wide range of all aspects and techniques of several different martial arts and combat sports.
N
Nashball – a field sport mixing elements of soccer, fistball, basketball, ultimate frisbee, and volleyball using horizontal end zone goals and strict no open-hand contact and strike.
P
Polocrosse - A hybrid of polo and lacrosse, played on horseback.
S
Samoa Rules – A hybrid of rugby union and Australian rules football
Segway Rugpolocrosse - A field sport which combines elements of Segway polo, rugby, and lacrosse, played on the segway allowing players to run with it either in hands or in the netted racket of lacrosse stick, and contact, impede, and tackle each other with the player's body, lacrosse stick, and segway.
Slamball - a full-contact team hybrid sports which will combine elements of basketball, American football, ice hockey, acrobatics, and video games, played on the basketball court, surrounded by hockey-style plexiglass walls, with two sets of four trampolines at the front of net and boards around the edges of this court.
T
Tennis polo - A hybrid of tennis and soccer


== Inactive sports ==
Austus – a combination of American football and Australian rules football played during World War II. However, this hybrid sport has not been recorded as having been played since the war.
Iomain - a variation of shinty-hurling, using a compromise stick, piloted once in 2013.
Universal football – a combination of rugby league and Australian rules football trialed briefly in the early 20th century.
Volata


== References ==