German Sport University Cologne (German: Deutsche Sporthochschule Köln, DSHS), founded in 1947, is a sport university in Cologne, Germany. It is the largest sport university in Europe with approximately 6,000 students. The German Sport University (GSU), in Cologne called SpoHo, combines qualified teaching and international research of the highest level. The University is located in the Cologne district Müngersdorf, adjacent to the facilities of the major sports in Cologne, such as the RheinEnergieStadion, home of the Cologne Premier League football team 1. FC Koeln. Since May 20, 2014 Heiko K. Strüder has been rector of the GSU, Chancellor has been Angelika Claßen since August 18, 2014.


== History ==

The Sport University Cologne was founded in 1947 and, thus, continued the academic tradition of physical education in Germany established by Berlin’s „Deutsche Hochschule für Leibesübungen“ (German University for physical exercise) which had been inaugurated in 1920. After the Sport University had changed its name to “German Sport University” in 1965 it gained the official status as a University in 1970. From now on, it had the right to award Ph.D.s (doctor of sport sciences) as well as the postdoctoral lecture qualification (Habilitation). After German reunification, the East German “Deutsche Hochschule für Körperkultur” (German University for “body culture”) Leipzig was dissolved, leaving the Sport University Cologne as the only one of its kind in Germany.


== Institutes and Departments ==
The University consists of the following academic units:
Institute of Biochemistry (IOC/WADA accredited Anti-Doping Laboratory)
Institute of Biomechanics and Orthopaedics
Institute of Cardiology and Sports Medicine
Institute of Cognitive and Team/Racket Sport Research
Institute of Communication and Media Research
Institute of Dance and Movement Culture
Institute of European Sport Development and Leisure Studies
Institute of Movement and Neurosciences
Institute of Movement and Sport Gerontology
Institute for Movement Therapy and Movement-Oriented Prevention and Rehabilitation
Institute of Outdoor Sports and Environmental Science
Institute of Pedagogy and Philosophy
Institute of Physiology and Anatomy
Institute of Psychology
Institute of Sport Didactics and Physical Education
Institute of Sport Economics and Sport Management
Institute of Sport History
Institute for Sport Law
Institute of Sociology and Gender Studies
Institute of Training Science and Sport Informatics
Institute of Professional Sport Education and Sport Qualifications


== Studies ==
Teacher (primary and secondary schools, grammar schools and comprehensive schools, vocational colleges, special education, and only specialist sports, other subjects at the University of Cologne):
Bachelor of Arts in Sport Management and Sport Communication
Bachelor of Arts in Sport, Health and Prevention
Bachelor of Arts in Sport, Outdoor Education and Movement
Bachelor of Arts
Bachelor of Science in Sport and Performance
Master of Science in Sport Management
Master of Arts in Sport, Media, and Communication Research
Master of Arts in Physical Activity and Sport for Seniors
Master of Arts in Rehabilitation and Health Management
Master of Arts Sport Tourism and Recreation Management
Master of Science in Exercise Sciences and Coaching
Master of Science in Sport Technology
The coaching-license, which is needed to be the Head-Coach of a 1st or 2nd Bundesliga team, can be obtained at the Hennes-Weisweiler-Academy (Hennes-Weisweiller-Akademie)
which is affiliated to the "German Sports University Cologne" (Deutsche Sporthochschule Köln).
The curriculum of this course of training is inter-coordinated with the German Football Association (Deutscher Fussball Bund; "DFB").
Licensing of foreign coaches seems to differ.


== See also ==
European College of Sport Science


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website