1888 in sports describes the year's events in world sport.


== American football ==
College championship
College football national championship – Yale Bulldogs (coached by Walter Camp)
Events
Tackling below the waist is legalised.


== Association football ==
England
FA Cup final – West Bromwich Albion 2–1 Preston North End at The Oval
Walsall Town and Walsall Swifts merge to form Walsall Football Club. The club initially plays under the name of Walsall Town Swifts.
Small Heath, later Birmingham City, is the first football club to form a limited company
7 April — Tinsley Lindley scores in his ninth consecutive England game, a record that still stands.
Origin of the Football League
One of the problems facing professionalism is the lack of competitive matches, especially for teams that have been knocked out of the FA Cup. It is self–evident that crowds for friendly fixtures are much lower, which means a reduction in revenue and consequent struggle to pay wages.
Aston Villa's Scottish director William McGregor seeks a solution by asking other professional clubs to arrange annual home and away fixtures on a competitive basis, with points to be awarded for winning and drawing. Following a conference between club directors on 23 March, the English Football League is founded on 17 April as one division of twelve clubs.
The founder members are: Accrington F.C. (1888–1893), Aston Villa, Blackburn Rovers, Bolton Wanderers, Burnley, Derby County, Everton, Notts County, Preston North End, Stoke F.C., West Bromwich Albion and Wolverhampton Wanderers.
India
Durand Cup instituted by Mortimer Durand as recreation for British troops stationed in India. It is the oldest tournament in India and the third oldest in the world.
Scotland
Scottish Cup final – Renton 6–1 Cambuslang
Celtic Football Club is founded by members of the Marist Order, a teaching institute, as a way of raising money for a poor children's charity. The club's first ground is a piece of rented land not far from the present Celtic Park. Celtic's first recorded match is a home "friendly" against Rangers; Celtic win 5–2 in what is therefore the inaugural "Old Firm Game".


== Baseball ==
National championship
National League v. American Association – New York Giants (NL) defeats Saint Louis Cardinals (AA) 6 games to 4.
Events
The last of many adjustments finally sets four balls and three strikes for a "walk" and a strikeout.


== Boxing ==
Events
The inaugural World Welterweight Champion is Paddy Duffy of Boston, Massachusetts who is recognised following his 17th round knockout of Billy McMillan at Fort Foote, Virginia on 30 October. Duffy retains the title until his death (by tuberculosis) in 1890. The welterweight division is for fighters weighing between 140 and 147lb.
Lineal world champions
World Heavyweight Championship – John L. Sullivan
World Middleweight Championship – Jack Nonpareil Dempsey
World Welterweight Championship – Paddy Duffy
World Lightweight Championship – Jack McAuliffe


== Cricket ==
Events
After a run of disastrous results over a number of seasons, Derbyshire is demoted from first-class status and the 1888 championship is contested by only eight teams: Gloucestershire, Kent, Lancashire, Middlesex, Nottinghamshire, Surrey, Sussex and Yorkshire. Derbyshire will recover first-class status in 1894 and join the official County Championship in 1895.
5 July — formation of Glamorgan County Cricket Club at a meeting in the Angel Hotel, Cardiff.
Thanks mainly to the bowling of Bobby Peel, England defeats Australia 2–1 to retain The Ashes.
England
Champion County – Surrey
Most runs – W. G. Grace 1,886 @ 32.51 (HS 215)
Most wickets – Charlie Turner 283 @ 11.68 (BB 9–15)
Wisden Six Great Bowlers of the Year – George Lohmann, Johnny Briggs, John Ferris, Charlie Turner, Sammy Woods, Bobby Peel
Australia
Most runs – Harry Moses 815 @ 62.69 (HS 297*)
Most wickets – Charlie Turner 106 @ 13.59 (BB 8–39)


== Golf ==
Major tournaments
British Open – Jack Burns
Other tournaments
British Amateur – John Ball


== Horse racing ==
England
Grand National – Playfair
1,000 Guineas Stakes – Briar-root
2,000 Guineas Stakes – Ayrshire
Epsom Derby – Ayrshire
Epsom Oaks – Seabreeze
St. Leger Stakes – Seabreeze
Australia
Melbourne Cup – Mentor
Canada
Queen's Plate – Harry Cooper
Ireland
Irish Grand National – The Maroon
Irish Derby Stakes – Theodolite
USA
Kentucky Derby – MacBeth II
Preakness Stakes – Refund
Belmont Stakes – Sir Dixon
The Futurity – Proctor Knott


== Ice hockey ==
March 15 – Montreal Hockey Club defeats Montreal Victorias 2–1 in a playoff to capture the 1888 AHAC championship.


== Rowing ==
The Boat Race
24 March — Cambridge wins the 45th Oxford and Cambridge Boat Race


== Rugby football ==
Home Nations Championship
The 1888 Home Nations Championship is the 6th series of the Home Nations Championship contested by Ireland, Scotland and Wales. England is excluded due to its refusal to join the International Rugby Board. The teams win one match apiece and the title is shared by all three.
Other events
The 1888 British Isles tour of New Zealand and Australia sees the first overseas touring rugby team from Britain. The tour is a private venture and not authorised by the Home Nations.
The 1888–1889 New Zealand Native football team are the first overseas rugby tourists from the Southern Hemisphere. The team plays matches under Rugby football, Victorian Rules football and Association football codes.
Bristol Football Club is formed when the Carlton club merges with rival club Redland Park to create a united Bristol team.


== Tennis ==
England
Wimbledon Men's Singles Championship – Ernest Renshaw (GB) defeats Herbert Lawford (GB) 6–3 7–5 6–0
Wimbledon Women's Singles Championship – Lottie Dod (GB) defeats Blanche Bingley Hillyard (GB) 6–3 6–3
USA
American Men's Singles Championship – Henry Slocum (USA) defeats Howard A. Taylor (USA) 6–4 6–1 6–0
American Women's Singles Championship – Bertha Townsend (USA) defeats Ellen Hansell (USA) 6–3 6–5


== References ==