The President's Challenge (also called Presidential Champions) is an American program promulgated by the President's Council on Fitness, Sports and Nutrition that aims to encourage all Americans to "make being active part of their everyday lives" and to be physically fit. The President's Challenge is designed to help motivate participants (international participants also eligible) to improve regardless of activity and fitness level.


== The program ==
The President's Challenge program includes Awards for actively performing members in their preferred games, sports, or athletics. There are various levels of Awards available. They are:
Presidential Active Lifestyle Award (PALA)
Health Fitness Award
Presidential Champions AwardsPresidential Champions Bronze Award
Presidential Champions Silver Award
Presidential Champions Gold Award
Presidential Champions Platinum Award

To obtain credit participants must log in their daily efforts, which as noted above can include both sports and physical fitness activities. Each daily activity gives a certain number of points, the number computed by both its intensity and duration. Reporting is entirely on the honor system. Each higher level award requires accumulating more points. There is not a time limit. Qualifiers are eligible for certificates, medals and patches, with the platinum award being a large medallion. The lower levels are comparatively easy, while the platinum award requires a sustained effort, typically over several years. Annually the number of people who reached this point has increased. Over 100 a year now earn it. Several have been awarded it multiple times.
Participants who achieve the Platinum Award are also offered participation in the Presidential Champions Platinum Award program.


== Website hacked ==
On January 11, 2012, the operators of the website for participants of the Challenge and Active Lifestyle programs learned that the website had been hacked resulting in the release of personal information of the participants. The President's Challenge website said it was down for "Site Maintenance – We're taking a little breather." On January 20, 2012, the website was modified to explain the hacking.
On January 27, 2012, The President's Challenge sent out emails to its participants saying that the website was functional as of January 24, 2012, and asked participants to reset their user passwords.


== See also ==
The Duke of Edinburgh's Award


== References ==


== External links ==
The President's Challenge
The President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports