Booing is an act of showing displeasure for someone or something, generally an entertainer, by loudly yelling boo! (and holding the "oo" sound) or making other noises of disparagement, such as hissing. People may make hand signs at the entertainer, such as the thumbs down sign. If spectators particularly dislike the performance they may also accompany booing by throwing objects (traditionally rotten fruit and vegetables) onstage, though the objects may not be meant to physically hurt the performer.
This practice has in recent times come under criticism. The opinion is often expressed that to boo a bad performance is unkind and demonstrates a lack of sophistication. However, the counterargument goes that the combination of booing and applause help keep the quality of public performance high, by emotionally rewarding the good and punishing the bad. Some baseball players who have been booed have stated that booing "spooked" or "bothered" them or their teammates, and that it "affected their performance". Another player stated concerning booing, "It hurts" and another stated, "It frustrates me when the crowd boos".


== Examples ==
Adam Goodes who played for the Sydney Swans in the Australian Football League was repeatedly and loudly booed by opposition fans during the 2015 AFL season at most of the matches whenever he touched the ball. During a match against Carlton, during the AFL's annual Indigenous Round, after he kicked a goal, he celebrated the goal by provoking the Carlton fans by performing an Indigenous war dance in which he mimed throwing a spear in their direction. Afterwards, Goodes claimed that the dance was based on the one he learned from the under-16s indigenous team the Flying Boomerangs, and that it was intended as an expression of indigenous pride during Indigenous Round, not with the intention of offending and intimidating the crowd. The booing escalated after the war dance.
In the Parliament of the United Kingdom, booing is officially not permitted; Erskine May states: "Members must not disturb a Member who is speaking by hissing, chanting, clapping, booing, exclamations or other interruption." Nevertheless, jeering and heckling are somewhat common during Prime Minister's Questions.
In sports, booing by fans is quite common. They may boo particularly-hated players on the opposing team, or any opposing player when there is an intense rivalry between the teams. Unsportsmanlike behavior is also booed, such as intentionally hitting home team batters in baseball or diving in association football or basketball (where it is a technical foul). Booing of referees or umpires after an unpopular ruling is also common. Booing of expelled players after receiving a second yellow card or a direct red card is also common for many reasons. In professional sports, one's own home team, players or coach may be booed due to a poor performance or season.
In traditional British pantomime, "the villain will generally include some abuse of the audience to stimulate hissing and booing" while the fairy and other protagonists are cheered.
Although rare, in the performing arts, opera remains one of the arts where booing remains, if not common, customary as merited. In orchestral music, booing is usually restricted to the premiere of a new work.
Rarer still is for motion pictures to be booed at their openings, and this is usually confined to film festivals when the production team is present.
During professional wrestling matches, most heels traditionally receive boos from the audience as the villain. Ability to infuriate audiences and draw "heat" (negative reactions such as boos and jeers) are considered essential skills for heel performers.


== See also ==
Audience participation
Heckler
Whistling in sports
New York Philharmonic concert of April 6, 1962
List of classical music with an unruly audience response
Roman Reigns


== References ==


== External links ==
Where Do Hecklers Come From? The origins of booing on Slate.