The Rizal Memorial Sports Complex, (RMSC) is a national sports complex of the Philippines, located on Pablo Ocampo St. (formerly Vito Cruz St.), Malate, Manila. It is named after the country's national hero, José Rizal. The whole complex is currently managed by the Philippine Sports Commission, while the property is owned by the Manila City government.


== History ==
Standing on the site of the former Manila Carnival Grounds, the RMSC was inaugurated in time for the 1934 Far Eastern Championship Games. The land where the Art Deco sports facility designed by architect Juan Arellano was built was donated by the Vito Cruz family. During the Philippine Commonwealth era the sports complex was also used as a civic area and was the site here Manuel Quezon was named one of the presidential candidates in the 1935 elections. It was destroyed during World War II, and reconstructed for use in the 1954 Asian Games.
The complex was renovated in 2011. The National Stadium, the centerpiece of the sports complex, has a maximum seating capacity of 30,000. The complex also houses the administrative office of the PSC, and quarters for the Philippine national athletes.
In December 2016, the group of businessman Enrique Razon has expresssed interest for the proposed urban redevelopment and modernization of the RMSC. The plan is to build-up contemporary buildings and commercial structures with modern smart technologies and amenities, as well as more greener open spaces within the property. A sports museum will also be construct here, while the facade of the Rizal Memorial Coliseum will be retained. The PSC had reportedly planned to be transferred the facilities in the proposed Philippine Sports City located in Clark, Pampanga. An online petition posted on Change.org was initiated to save the Rizal Memorial Sports Complex amid several reports on the planned redevelopment.
In April 2017, the sports complex was declared as a National Historical Landmark by the National Historical Commission of the Philippines and an Important Cultural Property by the National Museum of the Philippines ensuring the site's preservation due to the National Cultural Heritage Act.
On August 2017, the Philippine Sports Commission halted its negotations with the Manila City government on the planned sale of RMSC, instead it will be focused now on rehabilitating the sports complex.


== Notable events at the Rizal Memorial Sports Complex ==
Far Eastern Championship Games (1913, 1919, 1925, 1934)
1954 Asian Games
Southeast Asian Games (1981, 1991, 2005)
2005 ASEAN Para Games
2006 Asian Women's Club Volleyball Championship


== Facilities at the RMSC ==

Boxing Gym
Gymnastics Hall
Ninoy Aquino Stadium
Pencak Silat Gym
Philippine Center for Sports Medicine
Philippine Taekwondo Association Dojang and Main Office
PSC Badminton Hall
PSC Bowling Center
Rizal Memorial Swimming Center
Rizal Memorial Coliseum
Rizal Memorial Baseball Stadium
Rizal Memorial Track and Football Stadium (National Stadium)
Rizal Memorial Tennis Center


== See also ==
PhilSports Complex


== External links ==


== References ==

Philippine Sports Commission
Philsports.net
Map of the RMSC
txtmania on Babe Ruth