1905 in sports describes the year's events in world sport.


== American football ==
College championship
College football national championship – Chicago Maroons
Professional championships
Ohio League championship – Massillon Tigers
Western Pennsylvania Championship – Latrobe Athletic Association
Events
The college football season is blighted by a spate of serious injuries, some fatal, and U S President Theodore Roosevelt calls upon the game's authorities to reform it.
6 October — Night-time football is played west of the Mississippi for the first time (see 1905 Cooper vs. Fairmount football game)
December 25 — An experimental game using new rules is played in Wichita, Kansas under the supervision of John H. Outland. Proposed rules changes include the addition of the forward pass.


== Association football ==
England
The Football League – Newcastle United 48 points, Everton 47, Manchester City 46, Aston Villa 42, Sunderland 40, Sheffield United 40
FA Cup final – Aston Villa 2–0 Newcastle United at Crystal Palace, London.
14 March — foundation of Chelsea F.C.
Alf Common becomes the first player ever to be transferred for £1,000 when he moves from Sunderland to Middlesbrough
The First and Second Divisions are expanded from eighteen to twenty teams each ahead of the 1905–06 season, bringing the total number of League clubs to 40. New clubs elected to the league include Chelsea, Hull City and Leeds City.
Germany
National Championship – Union Berlin 2–0 Karlsruher FV at Köln-Merheim
Scotland
Scottish Football League – Celtic
Scottish Cup final – Third Lanark 3–1 Rangers at Hampden Park (replay, following 0–0 draw at Hampden Park)
Turkey
Galatasaray founded in Istanbul


== Athletics ==
Frederick Lorz wins the ninth running of the Boston Marathon.


== Australian rules football ==
VFL Premiership
Fitzroy wins the 9th VFL Premiership: Fitzroy 4.6 (30) d Collingwood 2.5 (17) at Melbourne Cricket Ground (MCG)


== Baseball ==
World Series
9–14 October — New York Giants (NL) defeats Philadelphia Athletics (AL) by 4 games to 1 in the 1905 World Series, which is the first organized by the modern National and American Leagues.


== Boxing ==
Events
13 May — James J. Jeffries announces his retirement from boxing and relinquishes the World Heavyweight Championship title
3 July — Jeffries referees the Marvin Hart v. Jack Root fight at Reno and "awards" his title to Hart, who has won by a 12th round knockout. Besides winning this bout, Hart has earlier in the year defeated Jack Johnson over 20 rounds at San Francisco. Hart holds the title until 1906.
9 September — Battling Nelson defeats Jimmy Britt by an eighteenth-round knockout to win the World Lightweight Championship.
20 December — Bob Fitzsimmons loses his World Light Heavyweight Championship to Philadelphia Jack O'Brien on a 13th round technical knockout in San Francisco. O'Brien effectively relinquishes the title soon afterwards and it remains vacant until 1914.
Lineal world champions
World Heavyweight Championship – James J. Jeffries → vacant → Marvin Hart
World Light Heavyweight Championship – Bob Fitzsimmons → Philadelphia Jack O'Brien → vacant
World Middleweight Championship – Tommy Ryan
World Welterweight Championship – Barbados Joe Walcott
World Lightweight Championship – Jimmy Britt → Battling Nelson
World Featherweight Championship – Abe Attell
World Bantamweight Championship – Joe Bowker → vacant → Jimmy Walsh


== Cricket ==
England
County Championship – Yorkshire
Minor Counties Championship – Norfolk
Most runs – C B Fry 2801 @ 70.02 (HS 233)
Most wickets – Walter Lees 193 @ 18.01 (BB 9–81)
Wisden Cricketers of the Year – David Denton, Walter Lees, George Thompson, Joe Vine, Levi Wright
Australia
Sheffield Shield – New South Wales
Most runs – Warwick Armstrong 460 @ 57.50 (HS 200)
Most wickets – Frederick Collins 27 @ 23.37 (BB 6–64)
India
Bombay Presidency – Parsees
South Africa
Currie Cup – Transvaal
West Indies
Inter-Colonial Tournament – not contested


== Cycling ==
Tour de France
Louis Trousselier (France) wins the 3rd Tour de France


== Figure skating ==
World Figure Skating Championships
World Men's Champion – Ulrich Salchow (Sweden)


== Golf ==
Major tournaments
British Open – James Braid
US Open – Willie Anderson
Other tournaments
British Amateur – Gordon Barry
US Amateur – Chandler Egan


== Horse racing ==
England
Grand National – Kirkland
1,000 Guineas Stakes – Cherry Lass
2,000 Guineas Stakes – Vedas
Epsom Derby – Cicero
Epsom Oaks – Cherry Lass
St. Leger Stakes – Challacombe
Australia
Melbourne Cup – Blue Spec
Canada
Queen's Plate – Inferno
Ireland
Irish Grand National – Red Lad
Irish Derby Stakes – Flax Park
USA
Kentucky Derby – Agile
Preakness Stakes – Cairngorm
Belmont Stakes – Tanya


== Ice hockey ==
Stanley Cup
Ottawa Hockey Club wins a challenge series against the Dawson City Nuggets of Dawson City, Yukon two games to nil. The Dawson club has travelled over 4,000 miles by dog sled, boat and train to play the Silver Seven but are outmatched. Frank McGee, incensed by comments from the Dawson squad, scores 14 goals as Ottawa wins the second game 23–2.
Ottawa wins the Federal Amateur Hockey League (FAHL) championship to defend the Stanley Cup.
Ottawa defeats Rat Portage Thistles 2 games to nil in a Stanley Cup challenge.
Events
9 December — Eastern Canada Amateur Hockey Association (ECAHA) is formed from teams in the Canadian Amateur Hockey League (CAHL) and the FAHL. Stanley Cup champion Ottawa and Montreal Wanderers join from FAHL and Montreal, Montreal Shamrocks, Montreal Victorias and Quebec Bulldogs join from the CAHL.


== Lacrosse ==
Events
The Intercollegiate Lacrosse Association (ILA) is replaced by the Intercollegiate Lacrosse League, which will be renamed the U.S. Intercollegiate Lacrosse Association (USILA) in 1929.


== Motor racing ==
Gordon Bennett Cup
Sixth and final running of the Gordon Bennett Cup takes place in France on the Charade Circuit, then known as the Circuit d'Auvergne, at Clermont-Ferrand. As road racing has been banned in France, this is the first time the trophy is contested on a circuit. The winner for the second successive year is Léon Théry (France) driving a Richard-Brasier.
Ardennes Circuit
The fourth Circuit des Ardennes is run on 7 August over 591.255 km (118.251 km x 5 laps) in the vicinity of Bastogne. The winner is Victor Hémery (France) driving a Darracq 80 hp in a time of 5:58:32.
Vanderbilt Cup
The second Vanderbilt Cup is run on 14 October over 455.430 km (45.543 km x 10 laps) on Long Island. The winner is Victor Hémery (France) driving a Darracq 80 hp in a time of 4:36:08.
Shelsley Walsh Speed Hill Climb
First running of the Shelsley Walsh Speed Hill Climb on August 12, still run annually on the same course.


== Rowing ==
The Boat Race
1 April — Oxford wins the 62nd Oxford and Cambridge Boat Race


== Rugby league ==
England
Championship – Oldham
Challenge Cup final – Warrington 6–0 Hull Kingston Rovers at Headingley Rugby Stadium, Leeds
Lancashire League Championship – not contested
Yorkshire League Championship – not contested
County cup competitions introduced in both Lancashire and Yorkshire ahead of the 1905–06 season. These are knockout competitions in the same format as the Challenge Cup except for their regional character.


== Rugby union ==
Home Nations Championship
23rd Home Nations Championship series is won by Wales


== Speed skating ==
Speed Skating World Championships
Men's All-round Champion – Coen de Koning (Netherlands)


== Tennis ==
Events
Inaugural Australian Championship is held, but for men only
Australia
Australian Men's Singles Championship – Rodney Heath defeats Arthur Curtis 4–6 6–3 6–4 6–4
England
Wimbledon Men's Singles Championship – Laurence Doherty (GB) defeats Norman Brookes (Australia) 8–6 6–2 6–4
Wimbledon Women's Singles Championship – May Sutton Bundy defeats Dorothea Douglass Lambert Chambers 6–3 6–4
France
French Men's Singles Championship – Maurice Germot defeats André Vacherot: details unknown
French Women's Singles Championship – Kate Gillou defeats Y de Pfooffel 6–0 11–9
USA
American Men's Singles Championship – Beals Wright defeats Holcombe Ward 6–2 6–1 11–9
American Women's Singles Championship – Elisabeth Moore defeats Helen Homans 6–4 5–7 6–1
Davis Cup
1905 International Lawn Tennis Challenge –  British Isles 5–0  United States at Queen's Club (grass) London, United Kingdom


== References ==