The following is a list of the largest sports contracts. These figures include signing bonuses but exclude options, buyouts, and endorsement deals. This list does not reflect the highest annual salaries or career earnings, only the largest contracts and thus is limited to athletes in team sports and auto racing. Athletes in individual sports, such as golf, tennis, and boxing are not employed by a team and usually earn money primarily through event winnings. This list also does not necessarily reflect actual money collected by the athletes, since some contracts are eventually terminated (usually due to an athlete either retiring or invoking his opt-out clause).


== Largest sports contracts ==
1 – Rodriguez's 2014 salary was reduced to $2,868,853 due to his season-long suspension related to the Biogenesis baseball scandal 2 – Rodriguez opted out of this contract after the 2007 season 3 – Vick's contract was terminated by the Atlanta Falcons after the 2006 season 4 – Arenas was suspended without pay for the majority of the 2009-10 season 5 – Based on regular season games only (excludes any playoff games), also in baseball, starting pitchers usually pitch every five games, resting during the interval between starts 6 - Exact contract figures will be available once the 2017–18 salary cap is set and contracts are officially signed R – retired Injury - While still technically under contract, injury has ended his career * – no longer on team‡ – entirety of contract salary not guaranteed


== See also ==
Gaius Appuleius Diocles
List of highest paid baseball players
Transfer (association football), contains a list of most expensive transfers in association football


== Notes ==
Contracts in the NFL are often not guaranteed, meaning that players who retire, or who are cut, do not receive their contracted salaries after their release from the team.
NBA and NHL seasons span two calendar years.
Michael Vick was suspended by the NFL in 2007. The Atlanta Falcons were unsuccessful in a civil legal process to attempt to recoup $20 million of the $100 million in bonuses paid to Vick under terms of his contract extension.
During his contract years, Michael Schumacher had significantly higher annual earnings than the athletes on this list with larger total contracts. On top of his $31 million per year paid by the Ferrari team, which alone ranked as the highest annual earnings at the time, he also earned a significant amount more per year from race winnings.
David Beckham signed a five-year deal with MLS soccer team Los Angeles Galaxy that was worth a reported $251 million, but that figure included commercial endorsements; only $5 million a year of that figure is salary from the club, while the rest will come via existing endorsements and profit sharing with the club.
Lewis Hamilton signed a contract with McLaren Mercedes worth at least ₤70 million ($138 million USD) over 5 seasons (2008–2012). However, no official contract details have been released by the team.
In 2010, the NHL rejected a 17-year, $102 million contract between the New Jersey Devils and Ilya Kovalchuk, saying that the contract was "a circumvention of the collective bargaining agreement." The later years of the contract would have paid Kovalchuk only $550,000 per year, which lowered the average value per year of the contract. (The NHL's salary cap is based on the average value per year.) 


== References ==