Dog walking is the act of a person walking with a dog, typically from the dog's residence and then returning. This constitutes part of the daily exercise regime needed to keep a dog healthy. It also provides exercise and companionship for the walker.


== Description ==

In the UK, The Kennel Club conducted a survey of 1,000 dog owners and found that one in five did not walk their dogs on a daily basis.
Dogs are walked with a collar around their neck, or a dog harness, or by following their owner by familiarity and verbal control. Commonly the dog is walked by the owner, or another family member, but there are also professional dog walkers.


== Health benefits ==
A study by Michigan State University showed that people who walk their dogs are 34% more likely to meet expected levels of exercise, with a recommended level of 150 minutes of activity such as dog walking per week. Matthew Reeves, the co-author of the study said, "There is no magic bullet in getting people to reach those benchmarks but walking a dog has a measurable impact."
Also according to the Health Benefits Channel showed that people who walk their dogs could regulate their blood pressure, build up muscles and bone strength and decreased stress. There are also some great benefits for your dog the study showed that walking your dog at less two times a week, can help with your dog's overall health, for example, there have a lot of cases of dogs having issues with obesity and because of this many dogs have started to develop health problems like osteoarthritis, cardiovascular disease, liver disease. So walking your dog a few times a week can lower your four leg companion chances of dealing with one of these health issues.
Research conducted by the University of Western Australia has discovered that walking your dog helps build relationships in your community research showed that people in the community would acknowledge and greet other people in the street exchange favors with neighbors which can encourage more exercise in the community giving pet and owners a chance at a healthier life.


== Professional dog walkers ==

Professional dog walkers, both individuals and businesses, are paid by dog owners to walk their dogs for them. Some dog walkers will take many dogs for a walk at once, while others will not. Also growing in popularity is dog running. Dog runners are professionals who will take your dog running, usually between 1 and 10 miles for a set fee, usually not more than 2 dogs at a time. In some jurisdictions dog walking businesses must be licensed and have animal first-aid-trained employees. Professional dog walking services can be obtained locally or through online referral services.
In the United States, the first professional dog walker is believed to have been Jim Buck, who in 1960 launched his dog walking service in New York City.


== See also ==
Pet sitting
Pet taxi


== References ==


== External links ==
 Media related to Dog walking at Wikimedia Commons