The Canadian Information Processing Society (CIPS) is legally recognized as the association that advances and self-regulates the Information Technology profession in Canada. The association certifies professionals against a standard of practice and competency, assigning the designation that recognizes the level of experience of the IT Professional holder in the eyes of the general public:
Beginner: Associate Information Technology Professional (AITP)
Seasoned: Information Systems Professional (I.S.P.) / Business Technology Management
Expert: Information Technology Certified Professional (ITCP)
The society also performs accreditation of computer science, software engineering and Business Technology Management programs, as well as college/technical institute level programs in Computer Systems Technology, Applied Information Technology, and finally, Post-Diploma type programs at Canadian universities. CIPS is responsible for defining the Canadian IT Body of Knowledge, and for enforcing a Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct.


== History ==
Calvin Gotlieb helped found CIPS in 1958, serving as its president from 1960 to 1961. Calvin was elected as founding fellow in 2006. The first President of CIPS was Fred Thomas serving in 1958 to 1959.
Prime Minister of Canada Stephen Harper provided a message to CIPS on the 50th anniversary.


== Organization ==
Each province has a provincial body that administers the legislation or regulation establishing the self-regulating professional body. This consists of the following bodies:
CIPS Alberta & North West Territories
CIPS British Columbia & Yukon
CIPS Manitoba
CIPS New Brunswick
CIPS Newfoundland and Labrador & Nunavut
CIPS Nova Scotia
CIPS Ontario
CIPS Prince Edward Island
CIPS Saskatchewan
In Québec, CIPS is partnered with the Réseau ACTION TI.
CIPS is the founding member organisation of the International Federation for Information Processing (IFIP). IFIP works on establishing international standards for information technology and software engineering. CIPS is also a member of South East Asia Regional Computer Confederation (SEARCC) and a founding member of IFIP IP3. CIPS is also a constiuent member of the ICCP, . which is the Institute for Certification of Computing Professionals, based out of the USA, and dedicated to the establishment of high professional standards for the computer industry across North America.
CIPS is also a member organization of the Federation of Enterprise Architecture Professional Organizations (FEAPO), a worldwide association of professional organizations which have come together to provide a forum to standardize, professionalize, and otherwise advance the discipline of Enterprise Architecture.


== Legislation ==
Alberta: Professional and Occupational Associations Registration Act, R.S.A. 2000, c. P-26, Information Systems Professional Regulation, Alta. Reg. 39/1997
British Columbia: Society Act, R.S.B.C. 1996, s.s. 86-93 (Occupational Titles Protection)
New Brunswick: Canadian Information Processing Society of New Brunswick Act, 2001, c. 49
Nova Scotia: Canadian Information Processing Society of Nova Scotia Act, S.N.S. 2002, c. 3
Ontario: An Act respecting Canadian Information Processing Society of Ontario, 1998, c. Pr21
Saskatchewan: Canadian Information Processing Society of Saskatchewan Act, S.S. 2005, c. C-0.2


== See also ==
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) (related organisation in USA)
Australian Computer Society (related organisation in Australia)
IEEE Computer Society (IEEE CS)
Institution of Engineering and Technology (IET)
International Federation for Information Processing (IFIP)
Mountbatten Medal
New Zealand Computer Society (related organisation in New Zealand)
Computer Society of Southern Africa (CSSA) (related organisation in South Africa)
Brazilian Computer Society (SBC)
British Computer Society (BCS) (related organisation in United Kingdom)


== References ==


== External links ==
Canadian Information Processing Society website
Réseau ACTION TI website
CIPS National Presidents 1958 to 2008
CIPS Fellows
CIPS Awards and Hall of Fame