The Australian Computer Society (ACS) is an association for information and communications technology professionals with over 22,000 members Australia-wide. According to its Constitution, its objects are "to advance professional excellence in information technology" and "to promote the development of Australian information and communications technology resources".
The ACS was formed on 1 January 1966 from five state based societies. It was formally incorporated in the Australian Capital Territory on 3 October 1967. Since 1983 there have been chapters in every state and territory.
The ACS is a member of the Australian Council of Professions ("Professions Australia"), the peak body for professional associations in Australia. Internationally, ACS is a member of the International Professional Practice Partnership (IP3), South East Asia Regional Computer Confederation, International Federation for Information Processing and The Seoul Accord.
The ACS is also a member organization of the Federation of Enterprise Architecture Professional Organizations (FEAPO), a worldwide association of professional organizations which have come together to provide a forum to standardize, professionalize, and otherwise advance the discipline of Enterprise Architecture.


== Activities ==
The ACS operates various chapters, annual conferences, special interest groups, and a professional development program. Members are required to comply with a Code of Ethics and a Code of Professional Conduct.


== Extent of representation ==
The ACS describes itself as "the professional association for Australia’s Information and Communication Technology (ICT) sector" and "Australia’s primary representative body for the ICT workforce", but industry analysts have questioned this based on the small percentage of IT professionals who are ACS members. The issue has been discussed in the press since at least 2004, and in 2013 the Sydney Morning Herald wrote that "the ACS aggressively seeks to control the important software engineering profession in Australia, but ... less than 5 per cent of the professional IT workforce belongs to the ACS." The ACS Foundation came up with a slightly higher figure: "Depending on the data used to calculate the number of ICT professionals in Australia, however, [ACS] membership represents approximately 6.5 per cent of the total."


== Presidents ==
The Australian Computer Society elects its National President every two years, who serves as the leader of the Society. Some of the most recent Presidents include:
Anthony Wong, 2016 - current
Brenda Aynsley, 2014 - 2016
Nick Tate, 2012 - 2014
Kumar Parakala, 2008 - 2010
Philip Argy, 2006 - 2008
Edward Mandla, 2004 - 2006


== Young IT ==
The Young IT Professionals Board of the Australian Computer Society provides a voice for young IT professionals and students, as well as a range of services and benefits for members. Currently Young IT organises and runs a bi-annual YIT International Conference and other events such as local career days, soft skills and technical seminars, networking opportunities and social events (e.g. Young IT in the Pub) in each of the Australian States.
The most recent Young IT Conference was held in Melbourne in 2014.


== Publications ==
"Information Age" is the official publication of the ACS. In February 2015 Information Age became an online only publication. Peer reviewed research publications of the ACS include:
Journal of Research and Practice in Information Technology
Conferences in Research and Practice in Information Technology
Australasian Journal of Information Systems
The Digital Library contains free journal articles and conference papers.


== Related organisations ==


=== Other Australian computer associations ===
AUUG - Now deregistered
Linux Australia
LUGs in Australia
SAGE-AU
Institute of Analytics Professionals of Australia (IAPA), incorporating business data analytics, business intelligence, data mining and related industries
Australian Software Innovation Forum, encourages collaboration and co-operation in Java EE and associated technologies


== Special Interest Groups ==
Special Interest Groups (SIGs) of the ACS are connected to each state branch with some SIGs of the same or similar name occurring in a number of states, depending on local interest, and include: Architects, Software Quality Assurance, Women in Technology, Business Requirements Analysis, Enterprise Capacity Management, Enterprise Solution Development, Free Open Source Software, Information Security, IT Management, Project Management, Service Oriented Computing, Web Services, Consultants and Contractors, IT Security, PC Recycling, Curry SIG, Information Technology in Education, Robotics, E-Commerce, IT Governance, Software Engineering and Cloud Computing. A recent addition is the Green ICT Group on computers and telecommunications for environmental sustainability. In 2007 the Telecommunications Society of Australia was absorbed into the Australian Computer Society as the Telecommunications Special Interest Group


== Education and Certification ==
The ACS runs the online Computer Professional Education Program (CPEP) for postgraduate education in subjects including: Green ICT Strategies; New Technology Alignment; Business, Strategy & IT; Adaptive Business Intelligence; Project Management; Managing Technology and Operations. CPEP uses the Australian developed Moodle course management system and is delivered via the web.
The Diploma of Information Technology (DIT) is equivalent to one academic year of a Bachelor of Information Technology at several universities. It has eight compulsory subjects: systems analysis, programming, computer organisation, data management, OO systems development, computer communications, professional practice and systems principles.
The ACS also certifies IT professionals at two levels, the Certified Professional and the Certified Technologist. Each certification level has a minimum level of experience and also required ongoing CPD (Certified Professional Development) hours of learning each year.


== See also ==
Skills Framework for the Information Age


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website of the ACS
ACS Foundation
Information Age