The Society for the Study of Artificial Intelligence and Simulation of Behaviour or SSAISB or AISB is a nonprofit, scientific society devoted to advancing the scientific understanding of the mechanisms underlying thought and intelligent behaviour and their simulation and embodiment in machines. AISB also aims to facilitate co-operation and communication among those interested in the study of artificial intelligence, simulation of behaviour and the design of intelligent systems.


== History ==
Founded in 1964, SSAISB, is the oldest AI society in the world. It is the largest Artificial Intelligence Society in the United Kingdom. the society has an international membership drawn from both academia and industry. It is a member of the European Association for Artificial Intelligence (previously known as European Coordinating Committee for Artificial Intelligence ECCAI).


== Objectives of the Society ==
The objectives of the Society are:
to promote the study of artificial intelligence, simulation of behaviour and the design of intelligent systems.
to facilitate co-operation and communication among those interested in the study of artificial intelligence, simulation of behaviour and the design of intelligent systems.
to hold, or to participate in the holding of, conferences and meetings for the communication of knowledge concerning, and to publicise and disseminate by other means knowledge and views concerning artificial intelligence, simulation of behaviour and the design of intelligent systems.


== Activities of the Society ==
The society hosts an annual convention consisting of parallel symposia covering various specialist topics, loosely organised around a theme. It also runs various events, especially to promote public understanding of AI and Cognitive Science. The society published the journal AISBJ (no longer published) and continues to publish a quarterly newsletter AISBQ which includes short reports on current AI and Cognitive Science research.


== External links ==
SSAISB website
Current and past SSAISB conventions
SSAISB Journal
SSAISB events
List of SSAISB Fellows