The Computer Society of Sri Lanka (CSSL) is a professional body and learned society in the field of Computing and Information Technology in Sri Lanka. It was established in 1976.
The CSSL was established in 1976 in Sri Lanka for the purpose of promoting Information and Communication Technology and professionalism among those engaged in the field of Information and Communication Technology (ICT), and of maintaining the highest professional standards among the Information and Communication Technology fraternity.
It is the apex body for ICT Professionals in Sri Lanka.


== Membership ==
There are six categories of membership to the Society.
Honorary Fellow Members
Members (MCS)
Associate Members
Student Members
Affiliate Members


== Objectives of the Society ==
The Objectives of the CSSL are as follows: 1. The primary objectives of the society are: To promote and develop the science of Information Technology and foster and maintain investigations and research into the best means and methods of developing and applying such science and to encourage, increase, disseminate and promote knowledge, education and training and the exchange of information and ideas in respect of all questions relating thereto or connected therewith: 2. To provide an Organization for professionals in Information Technology and by means of examinations and other methods of assessment to test the skills and knowledge of persons desiring to enter the profession. CSSL has played a nationally important role for over 35 years now and is considered the apex body for ICT professionals in Sri Lanka.


== The CSSL Council ==
The CSSL is governed by an Executive Council elected out of members. The election is held after calling for nominations via the AGM announcement. If there are multiple nominations for the same post, an election is held at the AGM.
The last AGM was held on 28 November 2016 at the Taj Samudra Hotel The new Executive Council that was elected consists of the following Members.
President - Mr. Yasas Vishuddhi Abeywickrama, Vice President - Mr. W K Prabath Samindra, Secretary - Mr. Damith Hettihewa, Treasurer - Dr. Ajantha Athukorala, Asst. Secretary - Dr Malitha Wijesundara, Asst. Treasurer - Mr. Parakum Amaranga Pathirana, Student Counselor - Dr. T A Samantha Thelijjagoda, Publication Secretary - Mr. Enosh Praveen, Council Member - Dr. Dayan Rajapakse, Council Member - Mr. Heshan Karunaratne, Council Member - Mr Buddhika Senasekara, Council Member - Mr Sajith Sameera
Yasas Vishuddhi Abeywickrama is the President of Computer Society of Sri Lanka (CSSL), the apex body for IT Professionals in Sri Lanka. Yasas was recognized in 2003 by CIMA (UK) as an up-and-coming business leader for the future. In 2009 he was named the Young Professional of the Year by Professions Australia. In 2011, Yasas was recognized with a TOYP award (Ten Outstanding Young Persons). He started his career at Virtusa in 2003, a US-based global provider of software development and ICT services in Sri Lanka. Yasas began in Software Engineering and later moved into Business Analysis roles, which saw him travelling around the world with postings in the USA and UK. Later Yasas worked for Accenture in Australia, the world’s biggest ICT consulting company. In 2010 he co-founded Lanka BPO Academy, which is Sri Lanka's pioneering organisation for training people for the IT Enabled Services and Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) industry. He is a Director of this organisation. Currently, Yasas is also the Country Manager of Quarrio Corporation - Sri Lanka Branch. Quarrio is an Artificial Intelligence product company from the USA with offshore branches in Pakistan and Sri Lanka. He is a proud product of Ananda College Colombo. He is a graduate of the University of Colombo, where he obtained an honours degree in Computer Science (2004). Yasas holds a Masters in Entrepreneurship and Innovation from Swinburne University of Technology in Australia (2010). He is a Board Member of IFIP (International Federation of Information Processing). IFIP is the global professional federation of societies and associations for people working in Information and Communications Technologies. Established under the auspices of UNESCO in 1960 and recognised by the United Nations, IFIP represents ICT professional associations from more than 50 countries and regions with a total membership of over half a million.


== Projects organised by the CSSL ==
The CSSL organises regular events for the benefit of the ICT community of Sri Lanka, and key among them are the following projects
National IT Conference (NITC)
National Schools' Software Competition (NSSC)
IT MasterMind National Schools' Quiz Competition
IT Blast / Membership Night, a Dinner Dance for the ICT Fraternity
CSSL Awards - An Annual Award Ceremony where key individuals and contributors are awarded and recognised.
In 2017, the CSSL will organize Sri Lanka's biggest ever International ICT event, as it hosts IFIP General Assembly, SEARCC Conference (South East Asian Computer Confederation's conference) and also Sri Lanka's National IT Conference (NITC) all on the same platform from 11 September 2017 to 15 September 2017.
At the AGM held in November, the new CSSL President Yasas Vishuddhi Abeywickrama presented the vision for CSSL in front of its valued members. This vision involves enhancing - Representation & Engagement, Activeness, Recognition, Knowledge Platform and Being Vocal & Present.


== Affiliations ==
Information and Communication Technology Agency of Sri Lanka (ICTA)
International Computer Driving Licence (ICDL)
South East Asian Regional Computer Confederation (SEARCC)
Organisation for Professional Associations OPA (OPA)


== External links ==
Official web site of Computer Society of Sri Lank